The Etheruem Yellow Paper is formatted in the most strange and unpractical way.
If we go through it thinking about "what are the things I might do with this chain, in order", we'll find that the paper is very out of order. The paper also has a bad habit of having extreme amounts of dramatic subjectivity despite trying to appear formal and explaining the meanings of symbols in an arbitrary and disjointed way, with some formulas containing symbols that haven't been explained (and may not be explained for many pages).

There is an Ethereum standard that we believe is the root of many problems, the one specific to providers. We believe this standard is the beginning of everything built on EVMs, Ethereum, and "Web3" assuming that there isn't or won't be or shouldn't be multiple chains. This makes every existing library very poor at supporting applications that work with multiple chains.

We also think that there is a culture in Ethereum where Ethereum believes it is *the* chain and should be the *only* chain and so some features and tools are disabled or restricted in that pursuit (can't have a testnet with zero gas costs, can't have a modern testnet straightforwardly and control the chain ID (this is with geth)) and the Ethereum team is weird and dismissive and illogical about such issues.

We've also find ourselves being borderline attacked or harassed for the things we're doing, suspiciously always by people within or closely related to "EIP authors and 'Ethereum Magicians' (a term we've grown to hate)", up to an including what I could only describe as an extraordinarily bizarre "intervention" in the auditing process of a contract I had partially worked on by the CTO of a large crypto auditing firm where the CTO was very hostile towards specifically the code I wrote in subjective and unprofessional ways, culminating in said CTO having what I could only describe as a "schizophrenic meltdown" on social media.
The gist is that he seemed to want to pin down my code as "wrong" in any way he could, but as an auditor he needs to be able to prove that and never could. He started with subjective "wrongness" which I dismissed as subjective, then eventually started to narrow in on some imagined exploit, which on social media he termed as "the most beautiful exploit", which he could not prove in any way (in fact, neither could I prove at the time why it didn't apply, but later I did prove that it was imaginary and did not apply). While he was doing this, many "Ethereum Magicians" and EIP authors and parts of that crowd or those closely related to that crowd were in support of the CTO, all the while nobody could provide proof of anything (a bizarre scenario when dealing with an *auditing* firm).

For the ecosystem as a whole, there's a lot of non-unification and substandard tooling. There is little to no EVM machine code support, nor even EVM assembly support, nor tools for automating compilation, testing, running a local node, etc. So far though, we've mostly dealt in JavaScript/TypeScript (Deno), and perhaps in other languages the support is much better. As an example, starting a geth node and making a test script with TypeScript is an extremely unpleasant process. We think we've been narrowing that the implementation and testing framework should exist in the same language, and there is a "TypeScript" execution client implementation but it seems to suffer the same flaws as ethers.js, initially written in old JavaScript and thus contains TypeScript definition files (although recently we think TypeScript is not very great and we may want to avoid it entirely, as we have found some extremely minimal examples that break TypeScript that are very computationally useful, so we consider TypeScript extremely computationally not well-founded or "poor").

The frameworks for testing and starting a local node have been extremely varied and pop up and die very frequently, and the frameworks for interacting with a node all don't really support multiple chains as well as they could, or involve a whole lot of peculiar notions and things one may not want, and all are generally bloated, and all are generally not conducive to automation or building more complex things.

The EVM is "just" a finite automaton. There are much more complex and capable automatons, and perhaps an "evolution" to the EVM would just be one of these more complex and capable automatons. We don't think "simulating" a higher automaton legitimately makes one such a higher automaton.